lassosum (standalone version for Linux)
=======================

### Description
This page is for the standalone version of `lassosum`. For full details of `lassosum` as an R package, please refer to [this page](https://github.com/tshmak/lassosum#lassosum-). 

### Installation
Follow the instruction [here](https://github.com/tshmak/lassosum#installation) to install `lassosum` on R. Then add the `lassosum` path to the `$PATH` variable. The `lassosum` path can be obtained by typing the following in R:  
```r
> system.file(package="lassosum")
```
For example, on my computer, I would type 
```{bash}
$ PATH=/home/tshmak/WORK/Rpackages2/nonMRAN/lassosum/:$PATH
```
in my Linux shell. 

### A quick example
The following is a quick example to run `lassosum` from a Linux shell, assuming lassosum has been included in `$PATH`. 
```{bash}
$ lassosum --data summarystats.txt --chr Chr --pos Position \
        --A1 A1 --A2 A2 --pval P_val --n 50000 \
        --OR OR_A1 --test.bfile testsample \
        --LDblocks EUR.hg19 --pheno testsample.pheno.txt \
        --nthreads 2
```
This will generate the following files: 

- lassosum.lassosum.pipeline.rds
- lassosum.validate.rds
- lassosum.validate.results.txt
- lassosum.splitvalidate.rds
- lassosum.splitvalidate.results.txt

The best PGS calculated by validation and split-validation are given in `lassosum.validate.results.txt` and `lassosum.validate.results.txt`. The .rds files are for further processing. For example, if you want to apply the best validated PGS to a new dataset (with `bfile`=`refsample`), type: 
```{bash}
$ lassosum --lassosum.pipeline lassosum.lassosum.pipeline.rds \
        --validate.rds lassosum.validate.rds \
        --applyto refsample
```
This will create a file called: 

- lassosum.results.txt

containing the best PGS in the new data. 

To actually try out the above example, copy the relevant files from the directory given by 
```r
> system.file("data", package="lassosum")
```

### Options
Almost all of the options available to the [R version](https://github.com/tshmak/lassosum#lassosum-) can be passed to `lassosum` standalone by prepending the option with `--`. For example, type 
```{bash}
$ lassosum ... --ref.bfile refsample --lambda 0.001, 0.002 --keep.test keep.txt ... 
```
to include `refsample` as the reference bfile, use 0.001 and 0.002 as values for lambda, and use only those samples specified in the `keep.txt` file as the testing dataset. 

However, there are a number of options which are specific to the standalone version, given below: 

- **`--data`** (*required*) The filename for the summary statistics data set. The summary statistics file must have headers, and the corresponding columns for correlation, chromosome, position, snp, A1 (alternative allele), A2 (reference allele), etc., are specified by the `--cor`, `--chr`, `--pos`, `--snp`, `--A1`, `--A2` option tags, corresponding to the same options in the `lassosum.pipeline()` R function. In addition, you can specify the columns for `--pval`, `--n`, `--beta`, `--OR`, or `--LDblocks`, corresponding to columns for pvalues, sample size, beta (effect size), odds ratio, or LD blocks. 
- **`--n`** The sample size. Can either be a column name in the summary statistics file, or a single number representing the sample size. 
- **`--LDblocks`** (*required*) Either a column name for a specified column in the summary statistics file, or a [`.bed`](https://www.ensembl.org/info/website/upload/bed.html) file giving the LD blocks, or one of `EUR.hg19`, `ASN.hg19`, `AFR.hg19`, `EUR.hg38`, `ASN.hg38`, `AFR.hg38` to use pre-defined LD blocks given by Berisa and Pickrell (2015). 
- **`--pval`**, **`--beta`**, **`--OR`**, **`--n`** These are only used to calculate the correlations using the function `p2cor` if `--cor` is not specified. 
- **`--pheno`** A text file with headers and 3 columns -- the first two columns must have headers FID and IID. The third column gives the phenotype. Used for performing validation and split-validation. 
- **`--covar`** A text file with headers and at least 3 columns -- the first two columns must have headers FID and IID. The other columns give the covariates for adjustment. Used for performing validation and split-validation. 
- **`--out`** The filename stub with which output files are named. This defaults to **lassosum**. 
- **`--lassosum.pipeline`** This gives the `.rds` file generated by `lassosum`, which saves the `lassosum.pipeline` object. You can then perform validation/pseudovalidation/splitvalidation on this object without rerunning `lassosum.pipeline`. 
- **`--validate`** Perform validation of the `lassosum.pipeline` results. This is automatically turned on when the `--pheno` switch is specified. 
- **`--splitvalidate`** Perform split-validation of the `lassosum.pipeline` results. This is automatically turned on when the `--pheno` switch is specified. 
- **`--pseudovalidate`** Perform pseudovalidation of the `lassosum.pipeline` results. 
- **`--applyto`**, **`--validate.rds`** Apply the validated best PGS to a new dataset. See example above.  
- **`--nthreads`** Number of threads to use. 

### Reference
Berisa, T. & Pickrell, J. K. (2015) Approximately independent linkage disequilibrium blocks in human populations. *Bioinformatics* 32, 283–285

### Support
If there are any questions or problems with running or installing `lassosum`, please do email me at <timmak@yahoo.com>. 
